DICOM	Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
AE	Application Entity
IOD	Information Object Definition
DIMSE	DICOM Message Service Elements
SOP	Service Object Pair
SCU	Service Class User
SCP	Service Class Provider
VR	Value Representation
UID 	Unique Identifier

DICOM
	-> Header (may be lost when converting to JPEG)
		* Name, age, gender, and date of birth
		* (Acquisition parameters, pixel intensity, matrix size, and dimensions of the image)
	-> Image

What does a DICOM Medical Image file contain?
	Any DICOM medical image consists of two parts—a header and the actual image itself. The header consists of data
	that describes the image, the most important being patient data. This includes the patient’s demographic
	information such as the patient’s name, age, gender, and date of birth. The header may also give information on
	image characteristics such as acquisition parameters, pixel intensity, matrix size, and dimensions of the image.
	When a file explorer is opened to view DICOM medical imaging data, the header can give patient and image
	information. The header is usually coded to the image so that the patient to whom the image belongs can easily be
	identified. However, the header may sometimes be lost if the DICOM file is exported to other formats, such as
	JPEG. Sometimes, you may want to intentionally lose the header data, usually for the purpose of anonymization in
	research cases. This can only be done using specific software functions.

PACS server:
	PACS stands for Picture Archiving and Communications System.
	This is basically a database in which all medical images are stored. A PACS server needs to have ample storage, as
	DICOM files, being of high quality, tend to occupy a lot of space. Each hospital usually has its own PACS server.
	Any medical image that is taken within a hospital is automatically stored within that PACS server.

How do I view a DICOM file?
	Proprietary software:
		* Only on the hardware of the manufacturer
	Third party software:
		* From the internet, CDs, etc.

What can I do to a DICOM file in addition to simply viewing the image?
	-> Enhancing the image quality
		* Increase or decrease the brightness of the image.
		* Changing the contrast to better distinguish between radiodense and radiolucent areas of an image.
		* Zoom in on the area of interest.
		* A special method of improving image quality in the area of interest involves maximum and minimum
		  intensity projections. This helps isolate areas that have absorbed maximum or minimum radiation,
		  distinguishing them from surrounding areas.
	-> Reconstructing images
		* The initial DICOM data set contains a series of two-dimensional images, taken in all three planes—axial,
		  coronal, and sagittal. These images can be reconstructed to give a three-dimensional view of the
		  anatomical area. This is called 3D rendering. Another technique, called Multiplanar Reconstruction (MPR)
		  involves making fresh slices from the 3D reconstructed images. This allows the radiologist to view
		  different anatomical levels or angulations from the slices that were originally acquired.
	-> Making measurements
		* Some medical DICOM viewers allow you to make linear or even volumetric measurements of anatomical
		  structures. This can be useful in planning treatment and assessing the efficacy of treatment. For
		  instance, in cases of traumatic injury to the bony orbit, volumetric analysis and comparison of the
		  injured orbit with the unaffected one can aid in planning orbital reconstruction.
	-> Comparing and combining medical images
		* DICOM medical applications allow the radiologist to compare two different images at the same time.
		  This is useful when one wants to assess the progress of disease over time or the efficacy of treatment.
		  Two different medical imaging modalities can also be combined using certain DICOM applications. For
		  instance, combining PET and CT images can ensure that areas of high metabolic activity (located using
		  PET) are mapped to specific anatomical sites (using CT scan). This allows the physician to extract the
		  advantages of both types of imaging modalities at the same time.

How do I Share and Export DICOM files?
	* The DICOM medical file of a single patient consists of multiple images, all of which are of high resolution.
	Therefore, the file size can be quite large (for instance, a single CT scan can run up to 35 MB). These files
	therefore need to be compressed before they can be shared and transferred.
	* There are two ways in which files can be compressed—lossless and lossy. In lossless compression, although the
	file itself is compressed, there is no loss of information. Therefore, the original file can be recovered at any
	time. However, this kind of compression requires a lot of processing and so lossless files are slow to open and
	slow to save. One cannot achieve a substantial amount of compression with this method. On the other hand, lossy
	compression allows reduction in file size by removing actual data. Usually, only redundant data is removed.
	Sometimes however, if excessive compression is done, the image quality can be adversely affected. With this
	method, files can be compressed to much smaller sizes than the original file.
		-> JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group): The JPEG format supports both lossless and lossy compression.
		   Standard JPEG uses lossy compression. The operator can specify how much compression is to be applied
		   and hence can control how much data is lost. Another version, JPEG 2000, supports lossless compression.
		   With this application, operators can identify certain areas of the image as ‘regions of interest’.
		   These areas alone will undergo lossless compression, while other parts of the image will undergo lossy
		   compression. JPEG is useful for easily sharing images between computers. It can be used for uploading
		   images on websites and for standard PowerPoint presentations. On the downside, the quality of the
		   images may not be good enough for paper publications.
		-> TIFF (Tagged Image File Format): The TIFF format can also support both lossy and lossless compressions.
		   TIFF delivers images of higher quality and is therefore the preferred format of several journals for
		   publication. However, the file size is larger and this may not be suitable for use in presentations or
		   on the internet.
		-> PNG (Portable Network Graphics format): This supports lossless type of compression. Using PNG, image
		   features such as brightness and transparency can be controlled. One advantage of PNG is that the
		   images can be tagged using metadata, similar to the header of a DICOM file. This versatile format is
		   suitable for publications, presentations, and the internet.
		-> GIF (Graphics Interchange format): This was one of the earliest imaging formats to be introduced and
		   is not much in use today. It has limited features and the compression is inefficient. It supports
		   lossless type of compression and is largely used for websites.

Patient IOD - information about the patient

Modalities: CT, CR, NM, ...

A DICOM file is an image saved in the Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) format.

It contains an image from a medical scan, such as an ultrasound or MRI.

DICOM files may also include identification data for patients to link the image to a specific individual.

You can open DICOM files with various applications, such as MicroDicom viewer (Windows), ezDICOM (Windows),
OsiriX (macOS), and MeVisLab (multiplatform). You can also upload DCM files to View My Scans and Jack Imaging
in a web browser and view the images.

DICOM groups information into data sets. For example, a file of a chest x-ray image may contain the patient
ID within the file, so that the image can never be separated from this information by mistake. This is similar
to the way that image formats such as JPEG can also have embedded tags to identify and otherwise describe the image.

A DICOM data object consists of a number of attributes, including items such as name, ID, etc., and also one special
attribute containing the image pixel data (i.e. logically, the main object has no "header" as such, being merely a
list of attributes, including the pixel data). A single DICOM object can have only one attribute containing pixel data.
For many modalities, this corresponds to a single image. However, the attribute may contain multiple "frames", allowing
storage of cine loops or other multi-frame data. Another example is NM data, where an NM image, by definition, is a
multi-dimensional multi-frame image. In these cases, three- or four-dimensional data can be encapsulated in a single
DICOM object. Pixel data can be compressed using a variety of standards, including JPEG, lossless JPEG, JPEG 2000, and
run-length encoding (RLE). LZW (zip) compression can be used for the whole data set (not just the pixel data), but this
has rarely been implemented.

The same basic format is used for all applications, including network and file usage, but when written to a file,
usually a true "header" (containing copies of a few key attributes and details of the application that wrote it) is added.

Image display:
To promote identical grayscale image display on different monitors and consistent hard-copy images from various printers,
the DICOM committee developed a lookup table to display digitally assigned pixel values. To use the DICOM grayscale
standard display function (GSDF), images must be viewed (or printed) on devices that have this lookup curve or on devices
that have been calibrated to the GSDF curve.

Value representations:
In addition to a value representation, each attribute also has a value multiplicity to indicate the number of data
elements contained in the attribute. For character string value representations, if more than one data element is being
encoded, the successive data elements are separated by the backslash character "\".

The core application of the DICOM standard is to capture, store and distribute medical images. The standard also provides
services related to imaging such as managing imaging procedure worklists, printing images on film or digital media like
DVDs, reporting procedure status like completion of an imaging acquisition, confirming successful archiving of images,
encrypting datasets, removing patient identifying information from datasets, organizing layouts of images for review,
saving image manipulations and annotations, calibrating image displays, encoding ECGs, encoding CAD results, encoding
structured measurement data, and storing acquisition protocols.

Disadvantages:
* According to a paper presented at an international symposium in 2008, the DICOM standard has problems related to data
entry. "A major disadvantage of the DICOM Standard is the possibility for entering probably too many optional fields.
This disadvantage is mostly showing in inconsistency of filling all the fields with the data. Some image objects are
often incomplete because some fields are left blank and some are filled with incorrect data."
* Another disadvantage is that the file format admits executable code and may contain malware.




